It was on the terrace, while playing with a group of friends, that I learned the value of time for the first time in my life. I must have been around 11. I don't remember exactly what it was that we were doing. It was a bright summer noon, with the occasional thick, dark cloud passing by. As one of these clouds passed right overhead, one friend said: "I bet the sun will come back in five minutes." I said, "I think it will take ten!". Neither of us were sure about what exactly five or ten minutes were, except that it was common to say "give me ten minutes", or "give me five minutes" to specify an arbitary but short period of time. I'd been gifted a rather nice Titan Zoop watch for my 11th birthday, which had just the function that would prove one of us right: a stopwatch. It was quickly started, and all we could do while waiting was look up at the sky, at the large grey mass obscuring the sun, surrounded by a brilliant light blue. The stopwatch feature could count minutes, seconds, and milliseconds. The milliseconds flew by, the 7-segment milliseconds were just a low-contrast blur. The seconds were more tangible, and the minutes... it seemed like forever before the minutes counter increased by one! We could do nothing but look at each other in confusion. After what seemed like forever, the sun finally beat down on us again. I was vindicated; it had taken slightly more than ten minutes. All we could do was walk away from the situation with a new respect for the passage of time. If ten minutes felt like an eternity, what was a year? How about a decade? A lifetime? An entire century? The perception of the passage of time is neither linear nor comprehensible. If the human mind finds it hard to grasp what a century really means, how can it be expected to comprehend a few thousand years, over which incredible work has been done?

The deep-rooted state and trait anxiety forces me to ask myself, every time I see someone swiping rapidly through a content feed filled with short-form content - do these people perceive what they see the same way I do? Do they realize that most of this content is simply nonsensical, and designed to arouse outrage for the sake of farming views and likes? Do they understand the content? Or does the simple fact of consuming the content satisfy their brains on a fundamental, physical and chemical level? I have come to realize that deep thinkers are very rare, and are only decreasing in number, while the rate of simple-minded consumers increases unabounded.

I picked up the book and leafed through the pages, closely admiring the simple yet powerful artwork. As I did this, my brain was slowly supplying me with negative material about AI. "AI is going to replace artists!" It slowly read through every single comment under AI content supporting it. I was soon swimming inside my own head, in an ocean filled with negativity and lack of care. I realized this was preventing me from being able to enjoy and appreciate the present, in which I really existed, and the book and illustrations, a physical reality I was holding, touching, feeling...

Consumers willing to consume, and even defend, what they were being fed with...

Imagine a security guard with a big smile, who really does not want to let you inside. The more you try to push him aisde, the harder he pushes back, the smile never fading. Every attack is met with just enough counterattack to give him a slight edge, slowly pushing you away from the desired object. More than the brute force he uses, it is the smile that unsettles you greatly. How can he keep it up, despite the exertion, despite your relentless attacks? Slowly, you realize that there is no way you can win. Millimeter by millimeter he will push forward, the smile still on his face. Everything you desire is being held away from you, and you are actively being pushed back. That is exactly what I feel about "AI" acceptance. It feels like you are alone, being pushed back by a vast, anonymous crowd, whose only goal is to "not be negative" and "not hate new technology" and be "accepting". No more creators, only consumers. And when you have people who can only consume, you can feed them anything you desire, and they will keep consuming. He who controls the feed, controls absolutely, without strength, for the strength lies within the people who want to keep consuming. Keep them fed, and your goals will be fulfiled, with no expenditure of effort. You are not turning people against themselves, you are turning people into mindless feeders, subconsciously doing your bidding, while outwardly expressing such thoughts such as "I have the freedom to believe."